Subscribe to a YouTube channel and press the bell icon to get the latest updates I bet, you had an overdose for Supreme Court, judgement on Ayodhya and overdose, also causes flatter.
So let me try the Collectorate as a usually try to do and I will do it in different section.
So first of all, what has the court ordered one?
The court has looked at the essential problem.
The core issue let's call it as if property dispute between Hindus and Muslims eat one claiming this little piece of land, which is about 2.77 Lekar that is this hot heart of the problem.
And you know, a lot of this disputed places in the world are like that.
There is the temple mount in Jerusalem.
For example, where there are many claims.
So they have treated this as early as a property dispute, and they have arrived medical tuition that weight of evidence and also averages probability everything it looks like the weight of evidence is in the favour of Hindus.
So they have given this land to the Hindu.
Second.
They haven't given this landover to any of the Hindu parties who were litigants involved in the case.
So they have not accepted their claims over it.
They given to the government.
Second thing is they given the government directions to setup it trust with proper rules regulations for a structure like it, trust and handover the land there in the class, 12 then decide, how is the temple to build who build it?
And when that happens at the same time table, tennis leave, the government has to ensure that Muslims are given 5 acres of land.
Either auto vi 8 acres that was acquired by the central government in Narsimha Rao stands for weather, 5, ekad someplace else, prominent and Ayodhya to everybody satisfaction that has to happen simultaneous Lee.
And remember that land will be handed over to Sony box board, which is the legitimate body and was one of the litigants.
In this case is Sunni waqf board can then built in Mosque or whatever it what to do with.
And third, it may not look that important.
But it also tells you the detail in which the judges have gone.
One of the petitioner was nirmohi Akhada, which claimed that it was the bad life with devotee of the of the day today, which looked after the temple all this while, and they had claims.
The court rejected the petition because they said, it was filed after the time limit and exhausted it Sel, because of the limitation floors Court has still compensated them by saying, the petition failed because every technicality, what did you have a claim?
So they also ordered the government to give a representative of nirmohi Akhada, a place on the trust that the government will now set up.
Now, remember inner cut the clutter yesterday, different contexts inside that was provoked by the Chief Justice, something the chief secretary and DGP of up for a meeting.
We had talked about in grid detail about article 142 of the Constitution that the article under which the court has unique.
Power.
Supreme Court has unique power.
It can give order with overwrite any existing law.
And inside the order it gives becomes the law.
And these are orders in the court, give an exceptional circumstances to do court and court complete justice.
So while the property issue has been decided only as a land dispute other direction that is handing over this property now to the government to set up a trust, and then to give 5 acres to the Muslims and also to give demo Akhada, a place on this trust for all order given under section under article 142 of the constitution to do complete justice.
That is very significant.
This is the sum of the courts order.
Now the court discuss in great length by the arrival, the conclusion that Hindus have a better right to this land.
Then the Muslim I will simplify it because Court language, although I must say this 1045 page is one of the better written judgements with input value of an Court judgements, never leave.
You befuddled sometimes I think that simply don't IQ to understand the Court judgements anymore.
But then I see the supreme court itself comparing the difficulties that High Court recent judgement.
We can't understand maybe I sell flagellate too much and I get the same problem with many Supreme Court, judgements, also, particularly many vaise, hi Saza seems he said this, but I say this inside that was my issue with meaning of t2g coal judgement, very look like III already made up it's mine.
This statement is not like that it's, very well, argued, it's, very short, sentences.
In fact, any student of law should read it.
Nothing vigilant.
Citizen.
Should also read the judges grow go at great length.
You say, why they are accepting above Muslim place.
So delicate distinction, which is very interesting.
They make a distinction between the structure that was the most that was demolished and the land and the go with the logic.
The title belongs to the land owner has to have title to the land and structure while Muslims have the structure again, the courses that that structure was not built.
It was not to eat generous.
It was built above another structure of the given by the Archaeological Survey survey of India report that structure was not an Islamic structure.
And it doesn't look like it was a Hindu structure inside the code goes on to say that when the mosque was built, even a new Foundation stone foundation for the boss was not late.
It was built on the foundations of the structure existing there soup in terms of the ownership of the structure Muslim 20 best organ of case.
Hindus on the other hand, have a better case because once again, they have privilege land the site over the building 2nd quarter said that while Muslims have been trained there since 1856.
The mosque was built in 1528 between 15288 1856.
There is no record of Muslim shaving blade.
There were Hindus.
Historically have been going there to pray.
There is a beautiful picture in the judgement where the judges actually divided into four a fox.
And a look we have to look at this 4 if possible One Epic, they don't use the word for can you sing?
One is the effect before 1528 that is it free Mughal Era in India.
It looks like structure, which looks like a Hindu structure was built in this place, maybe around the 12th century.
But they don't know anyone archaeologist can tell us what happened between the 12th century and se, 15281.
The Mughal dynasty began when a like it's likely that this Mosque was built.
So they have to look at that 400 year.
History after that between 15262 15282 1856 is the second PUC.
That is the Google for you remember 1856 1857, the first fight for freedom.
What the British call British historians cal se, duty to play, then Bahadur, Shah Zafar.
The last ruler of the Mughal dynasty was defeated taken away, 222222, Burma diet there.
In fact, I record with sitting on a road named after him on dehleez, Bahadur, Shah, Zafar, Marg.
So Mughal Empire ended at that is when 1856 is when the British acquired award for Avid, because in the British to cover a lot of the territory, which they were not directly. Ruling from then there record Muslim going there for prayer.
But it is also around that time that Hindu group also find the file their claims to the site.
So the code goes on to say that in terms of length of occupation and extent of you Hindus have a better claim and evidence compare to Muslim, then they both the next.
They all right.
I.
Am not giving it to the Hindus, but can I just toss there I will treat a passage from the judgement.
But I think is a very well written passage passage.
It'S bit long, I will not paraphrase it I will just read for you the judges, pay the allotment of land to the Muslims is necessary there.
Now justifying 5 acres of the Muslim, the allotment of land to the Muslims is necessary because do on a balance of probabilities, the evidence in respect of the possessory claim of the Hindus to the composite whole of the disputed property stands on a better footing.
Then the evidence reduced by the Muslims.
The Muslims were the possessed upon the desecration of the mosque on the night of 22nd 23rd, December 1949, that's when idle for place there by a mob in the Barbie 59049, which was ultimately destroyed on 6, December 1992.
There was no abandonment of the Muslim I.
Am going directly from the order want to say this quote in the exercise of its powers under article 142 of the Constitution, not in sure that is wrong committed must be remedied.
And what is the wrong wrong is definition of the Mask in 94949 and its destruction in 1992.
So that wrong must be remedied.
Justice would not prevail if the earth were to overlook the entitlement of the Muslims who have been deprived of The.
Mask 2 means, which should not have been employed in a secular Nation committed to the rule of law that was the constitution, postulates, the equality of all face tolerance and mutual coexistence Naresh, the secular commitment of our Nation and its people celebrate on that got the news that special power 2 ticket to the Muslims to build their mosque.
In fact, once again, the gone to say that this is, this is a restitution for wrongful destruction of a place of worship that is how they went gone beyond the I would say the scope of the suit, which was the trip title suit for land, the gone beyond that then I find some very interesting things explain to you fall.
What the court has set the orders second, why they have arrived in the conclusions that they have arrived at via be given to the Hindus and not to Muslims.
And because if given to the Hindus, why have then then gone beyond the scope of The Suite to allot fresh land to the Muslim?
If you remember what happened in 1992, how the movement built up and how this is carried on Saugandh Mandir, wahi, Banayenge, slogans also was yah to Keval Shah, Ki, Hai, Kashi, Mathura, baki, hai, aur, tension, Nahin, Hai, 30,000 write India head, Messi history.
History of India in particular has had a Messy history for the past 1500.
If you start using one thing as a president to then target everything else with Asin other other injustice of history, then there will be no into trouble in this country.
So Parliament of India in 1991 inside before Barbie destruction has passed a law called places of worship act 1991, which said that all places of worship in India at the existed as India and its them on 15th.
August 1947 will be preserved as they are the change the status of nothing will change so that live there.
But now the court has allowed status, change Kota, sanctified it in Ayodhya.
So what is to stop it from becoming a President?
And now once is done maybe Vishva, Hindu Parishad.
Somebody Vikram can then move to gyanvapi Mosque in Banaras aur can move to Mathura, because those are the big holy places where you again, see temples and mosques standing cheek by jowl history is very similar to Ayodhya there.
The court has been very careful and poet has written this in great detail.
The Kota said, this law is there, we know that the lord will be respected.
They are making exception with in this case we are not.
We cannot apply that law to Ayodhya because the law itself in one of exceptions, excludes Ayodhya, because when the law was passed already on also that are you, there was a dispute which predates 1947 because the initial suits of file in the 19th Century.
That is an exceptional case, otherwise that law will continue to protect all other places of worship while writing that the court is written.
Some very interesting lines, which I think are worth worth coating.
The courses non retrogression litigation means you should not go back in history known retrogression is a foundational feature of the fundamental constitutional principles of which secularism is a core component.
Kota se.
Then it goes on to say known regression.
Non retrogression is an essential feature of secular values.
Once again, say, you can't keep going to back to the past and connecting what you see as injustice is of the past move on just don't.
Look back I want to say, Lords law speaks to work history and to the future of a into the future of a nation, While We're, Cognizant, vah history.
The courts is need for the nation to confront confront your history, but then move on because Independence for the moment, 15th, August, 1957, which healed meaning of these walls of history.
And it should be seen like that.
Then record was gone to say, Parliament has mandated in no uncertain terms that history.
And its wrong shall not be used as instruments to impress the present.
And the future I would save I take that as a great day take away.
And anybody can Basilica what you think other statements you seen the RSS chief saying that RSS intense not to get involved in political Movement in future.
Insert.
He was specifically asked about Madurai in Kashi, hi pretty much indicated that this was it.
The Vishva Hindu Parishad also spoken out.
They also said that different conditions, embarrassing situation in Ayodhya.
So this is it.
And we wear this week, conciliatory address to the nation from the Prime Minister.
And he is also having on basically on the theme of harmony.
Communal harmony, cast harmony, social Cohesion.
So I would rather be optimistic.
It sometimes better.
You can always go wrong, but its Summit sometimes better or open better to go wrong on the side of optimism and pessimism of captive scepticism or cynicism.
I.
Do think that this order will provide closure to one of these old festering problems.
And after this there won't be any more remember at said to you earlier that my friend KV,, the always yesterday good news station is one way both sides get up a little bit and happy I won't say, this is this.
This fits perfectly the definition, but it almost the CEO and the way different communities have responded to it.
The way even Muslim groups have responded to it.
The way Congress party other opposition parties, Aam, Aadmi, Party, Nitish, Kumar, Dube.
Everybody is respond to this.
It looks like the this country is polity.
Now, if in a mood to leave the past behind and move on this is more in case of Chhodo, Kal, Ki, Baatein, Kal, Ki, Baat, purani,